---
layout: post
title: First year conclusion
date: 2024-09-16 16:15:09
description: 
tags: experience
categories: classes
tabs: true
related_posts: false
toc: 
  sidebar: left
---


I would say that my first year experience in UCI is mediocre. There are many things that I regretted. 

One of my regrets is not successfully changing my major to Computer Science. I found it incredibly frustrating that every time I tried to enroll in ICS 31, the website would crash. Meanwhile, my roommate consistently registered for the ICS series, which only made me more exasperating. I later learned that UCI has a policy guaranteeing enrollment in ICS 31 if you have successfully completed ICS 9. I wasn't aware of this policy until I spoke with some alumni about changing majors. If I had known, I could have applied for both ICS 9 and ICS 31 simultaneously instead of focusing on just one class. Understanding university policies is crucial, but this particular policy was not clearly shown on the website, nor was it mentioned by my academic advisor. When I inquired about easier ways to switch to the ICS major, I was only advised to take summer classes at a community college. I initially looked for local community college courses but later discovered through alumni that a course at UCB could substitute for ICS 31-33. I successfully enrolled in that course. During the summer, I worked hard on the course and earned an A+, which was a great achievement. However, my excitement was quickly dampened when the ICS department informed me that the course could only replace ICS 31-32, not ICS 33 as I had hoped. They explained that the contract for course replacement had expired last year, so it could no longer cover ICS 33. This was particularly frustrating since the syllabus for ICS 33 closely matched that of UCB's 61A, both covering similar topics such as generators, iterators, and recursion. What added to my frustration was that I couldn’t immediately replace the UCB course to ICS 31-32; this could only be done after the major restriction was lifted on September 19th. I was well aware of my difficulties with course enrollment. Despite this, I realized that I could still switch my major to Data Science, which is also under the ICS department, even if I couldn’t enroll in ICS 33. Overall, the process of changing my major was quite stressful and did not turn out as I had hoped.

Second regret is that I didn’t make many friends. Initially, I joined clubs like AI and ACM with the hope of meeting new people. I attended events such as the beach party organized by the AI club, but I found it difficult to engage in conversations due to a lack of relevant experiences to share. This led to a situation where I felt disconnected from others who talked about their friends and experiences in other clubs. As a result, I stopped attending these events because I felt alienated. Reflecting on the club event I attended before, like the beach party, I realize that instead of avoiding club activities, I should have attended more events and taken note of any experiences or topics that I could discuss later. Building relationships often depends on having a wealth of experiences to share, and my difficulty in forming connections was partly due to my limited engagement. In hindsight, participating more actively would have provided me with more stories and content to share, ultimately leading to better relationships.

Of course, I did have some achievement last year. Last year, I participated in an AI Innovation Challenge, which gave me the chance to collaborate with other students passionate about AI. Our project involved developing an AI chatbot, and I was particularly excited about our first meeting where we brainstormed various features and discussed technologies like LLMs and databases. Despite our enthusiasm, we struggled with a lack of clear goals, which led us to continuously add new features every week. A week before the deadline, we still hadn't completed a single feature. It was at this moment that I stood up and held a meeting. I told teammates that we should have a determined goal and we should focus on developing a feature this week.  This shift in approach allowed us to complete the project, but we only received a participation award as our single feature was not enough to advance in the competition. From this experience I gained friendship with a student in senior, and later he would introduce other seniors who have passions on AI as well. This notion of having a determined goal was not so obvious to me as I continuously did things without knowing my goal. This oblivition of goal would inhibit me from achieving in other fields as I will discuss later.

Last year, I worked as an independent researcher under Professor A. However, since I didn’t have a clear research focus, he assigned me various tasks, such as converting a 3-layer ReLU neural network to a 2-layer network and testing how different datasets affect distillation. While I conducted some experiments and found interesting results—like how the MLP grouped similar data together and distanced different data—I gradually lost interest due to the lack of a specific goal. My final task involved exploring ways to make LLM architecture more efficient. This topic was challenging to tackle because of limited computational resources and unclear direction. Initially, I searched aimlessly for information on any LLM architecture I could find. Eventually, I started playing video games and golfing with friends, distancing myself from Professor A. By the end of the quarter, when I tried to reconnect with him, he stopped responding. I regretted not having a clear goal from the start, as my aimless exploration drained my passion for research. I promised myself to set a definitive goal for next year and to read more papers to find a clear direction.

During summer vacation, I interned at a company that developed AI chatbots for students. I was excited to implement LLMs and techniques like Chain of Thought (CoT), but once I joined, I found out they weren't looking for advanced implementations. Instead, they focused on making profits, fixing bugs in registration and UI, and collecting data. My first task was to gather data from public university websites. Although it seemed simple, it was challenging due to the different HTML formats. Eventually, I used Selenium to capture website UIs and GPT-4 to analyze the images, which worked well. The company then used my program to collect other types of data, like nearby restaurants and university policies. 

After finishing that task, I asked my leader what I could do next, and he suggested learning JavaScript to make company's code on github more concise. At first, I protested, saying it wasn’t my job, but since I had expressed interest in backend work, I finally decided to give it a try. I spent half an hour each day learning JavaScript and Java, even though I was mainly focused on my UCB courses. Over time, I lost interest in studying a programming language that felt unrelated to my original goals of implementing models. Looking back, I regret not leaving the internship when they said there would be no new model implementations. Still, I did learn a lot about how a small AI startup develops products by understanding user needs, designing UI and systems, creating subscription models, collecting data, and using various apps for team communication.